# ionos-wordpress

## 0.0.3

### Patch Changes

- c59365e:

## 0.0.2

### Patch Changes

- 5dddc7f: `pnpm build` will build all packages in the workspace.

  - By default the JS/CSS will be transpiled for production.

    To compile to development mode you can set `NODE_ENV=development` before running the build command.

    > [!TIP]
    > You can persist the `NODE_ENV` setting in you personal `.env.local` file. This file will not be commited to the repository.

- 2e44af5: changeset integration

  - detailed workflow (local first) :

  ...

- 93a8d8f: devcontainer integration

  - features

    - [x] Dev Container definition (`./.devcontainer`) providing
      - [x] `pnpm`
      - [x] `composer`
      - [x] `wp-env`
      - [x] `php` including out of the box `xdebug` support
      - [x] SSH access
      - [x] configurable environment (`./.devcontainer/devcontainer.env`)
    - [x] Automatic provisioning of the Dev Container for CI using a GitHub Action
      - [x] including caching of the Dev Container image
    - [x] VSCode Dev Container integration

    Docker in Docker works smoothly in the Dev Container (`wp-env` makes usage of this feature).

    Additional Software can easily be installed/configured into the Dev Container by editing `./.devcontainer/Dockerfile` and or `./.devcontainer/devcontainer.json`.

  - GitHub actions

    GitHub action `./.github/workflows/build-devcontainer.yml` is used to build the Dev Container image and push it to the GitHub Container Registry.

    The image is then used in the CI pipeline to run the tests (`./.github/workflows/test-devcontainer.yml`).

  - setup using dev container :

    - install vscode
    - install vscode extension `ms-vscode-remote.remote-containers`
    - open vscode and follow the directions or open the devcontainer in vscode

  - Snippets

    - execute `composer --version` in dev container : `pnpm exec devcontainer exec --workspace-folder $(pwd) composer --version`
    - execute `pnpm exec devcontainer build --workspace-folder $(pwd)` to rebuild the devcontainer image

- 13c8954: added configurable environment support

  - the `./.env` file is injected into every `./scripts/*.sh` command

    this file is supposed to be checked into the repository and contains default environment variables.

    this file **should not contain sensitive information**.

  - the optional `./secrets` file is injected into every `./scripts/*.sh` command

    this file is **not checked into the repository** and **contains sensitive information like tokens, passwords and so on**.

    see `./.secrets.example` for usage.

  - the optional `./.env.local` file may be used to override the default environment variables.

    use it to customize your local development environment.

    this file **will not checked into the repository**.

    see `./.env.local.example` for usage.

- 7ba5e48: added wordpress essentials plugin skeleton
- 13c8954: refactored package scripts to separate shell scripts

  - all `./scripts/*.sh` scripts are _commands_ that can be run from the root of the project.
  - they will load the `.env`/`.env.local` and `.secrets` files before running the appropriate command.
  - `./scripts/includes/bootstrap.sh` is a helper shell include file providing

    - utility functions used by scripts and commands
    - sets up the environment for the commands by injecting the environment read from `./.env`, `./.env.local`, and `./.secrets` files

    _sub package related `.env`, `.secrets_`and `_.env.local_` files can also be placed into the respective sub package directories.

- f5a6826: add storybook support
- f71b7ab: added repo toolchain configuration for

  - editor (vscode)
  - git
  - pnpm configuration files

- ab7ce6e: add vscode configuration

  - settings
  - launch configuration (will be automatically generated by '.wp-env-afterStart.sh` script)
  - recommended extensions (will be automatically generated by '.wp-env-afterStart.sh` script)

- 7629a67: wp-env configuration will be generated by `./scripts/start.sh` script.
  launch configuration (will be automatically generated by '.wp-env-afterStart.sh` script)
recommended extensions (will be automatically generated by '.wp-env-afterStart.sh` script)
